Testing, testing, one, two, three, four, one, two, three, four.
Hello, hello, hello.
This is September the 20th.
I have the pleasure of interviewing old friend and colleague Garland Bayless about his many years, close to 40 now, of being part of the A&M community.
Garland, to begin with, to help anyone who might listen to this tape or read the transcription,
who might not know you, describe your background before getting to A&M.
Where'd you grow up, family, high school, college, military experience, and so forth?
I grew up in McGee, Arkansas, in the southeastern part of the state, so-called Delta.
It's cotton, corn country.
We became soybean and rice.
in my college career at Arkansas A&M in Monticello, down at the University of Arkansas in Monticello in the fall of 1942.
And that was that year of 1942.
As all of you know, the war was pretty well underway by then, and we'd sit around the dorm trying to decide which way to jump rather than be drafted.
Many of my friends chose to go in the Army, end up in the Army STP program, which is similar to the Navy B-12.
I chose the Navy B-12, and it was set up that you would finish your degree and then go to Naval Officer School or so-called the Shipping School.
Well, as the war progressed, that played out and they established what they called the five semester.
You had three, you got two, you had two, you got three.
Then you went to the Navy Midshipmen School.
I was selected to go to the one at Columbia University in New York City and talk about culture shock.
Go from southeast Arkansas, the largest town I'd ever seen at age five was New Orleans, and I go to New York in the spring of 1944 after having completed five semesters in New York and Arkansas.
And received orders to go to California to pick up a transport ship.
And so I rode the train all the way from New York via McGee to see my mother, the rest of my family, then on to San Francisco.
And there I picked up the USS John J.H.
McRae AP-149, which was a Navy transport.
You've heard the expression, you join the Navy to see the world.
In the years aboard that vessel, we steamed right at 150,000 nautical miles, which is a lot of water.
At least that's what I was told.
I did not measure it.
And I put those years transporting troops to the United States, to Australia, to New Guinea, to Kenyan, to Timor.
towards being in the news lately, to the Philippines, back to the States, through the Panama Canal, went to France, picked up troops there.
Well before that, back through the Panama to New York and picked up troops and took them through the Suez Canal, through the Persian Gulf and up to Iran, brought troops back.
back through the Suez Canal, and then we all set up going to Calcutta.
I don't need to tell all of that, but we spent a lot of time at sea, twice in France, once to Iran, once to India, the Philippines, etc.
Now this began in what year?
Your active duty?
No, the shipboard activity began in October 1944.
Prior to that I'd been at Arkansas Union and at Columbia University in midshipman's school.
And you were how old when you went on?
I was 19, I was 20 when I was commissioned.
And it was rather ironic, I had enlisted people who were in their 40s and 50s and you have to sort of play the game there that you don't pop up and say, well I'm Ensign Bayless, you do so and so.
We had a few Ensigns who tried that and didn't work very well.
But after joining the Navy and seeing the world, I was discharged.
Wait just a second, where were you when you heard the news about the bomb, the A-bomb and the end of the war then in Japan?
We picked up in Lahore, France elements of the 9th armored and huge army medical outfit.
We were heading to the Panama Canal to take them to somewhere in the Pacific.
We had not been told yet.
When the war was over, after dropping the bomb, the word was passed, those ships that already tranced in Panama would continue their destination.
We were about mid-Atlantic, so we were diverted to Norfolk, Virginia.
And when that word was passed, and remember these guys had already been fighting in Europe,
They were now being taken to fight, to invade Japan, is what the ultimate goal was to be.
And when word was passed on this ship, it was about 17,000 ton, had almost 3,000 troops on board.
Their sight was such that from my view, that ship rocked.
At least it felt like it was rocking.
And so we were diverted to Japan.
I said, Norfolk, I think it was New York.
I might point out that recently we saw this movie, Storm at Sea.
I mean, that's something in the movie about that fishing vessel.
The perfect storm.
And it reminded me because on that trip, we were going to New York, not Norfolk, excuse me.
We ran into the heaviest seas that we'd ever seen.
And in normal steaming of 24 hours, we would do about 420 nautical miles.
On 124 hours, as best we could calculate, we made 11 nautical miles for the rest of the time.
We kept them bound in the sea and just hoped that we did not turn over.
And that was probably the worst experience that I ever had at sea.
Plus it was winter and cold and icy and all that kind of good stuff.
but that's where we were at Mid-Atlantic when the word was passed and there was joy beyond measure, not only for our crew but also for the members of that.
Shortly after our ship tied up in New York and I was transferred to the Navy Yard at Brooklyn for duty to decommission vessels as they came in.
Of slight interest, the first one I did was a reverse Lindley's LST coming back from the British Navy.
And that was my first encounter with the British Navy.
I take that back.
We saw them in Calcutta.
But where I had to go aboard and meet the CO and say, I'm here to take control of this vessel for the United States Navy.
I won't go into it.
but they did not leave that vessel in very good shape.
On our ship, our crews complained all the time because there's constantly chipping paint getting the rust out and painting.
This ship was in terrible shape, but that's how I finished my active duty career was at the Brooklyn Navy Shipyard decommissioning other vessels.
When I was discharged, as I en route home, I went by Kansas City, Missouri to see a ship made.
Chicago, Kansas City.
Then to Portsmouth, Arkansas.
I got on a bus and rode up to Fayetteville to enroll in the University of Arkansas at Fayetteville.
Then went home and then I finished my undergraduate at the University of Arkansas.
Majoring in?
Zoology and chemistry.
I was one of the millions and millions and millions who started as pre-med and decided that was not for me.
Got through there, went back home to McGee, Arkansas, taught public school one year, tried to settle life insurance and starved to death.
My brother had gone to Orange, Texas to work for DuPont.
He called and said, why don't you come here?
So I went to Orange, worked for DuPont as an operator helper, decided
that I did not want to do shift work the rest of my life.
Meantime, I met my future wife, Mary Evelyn Futrell, and we decided to get married and for me to go to Austin to go to graduate school to pursue a master's of all things in history, because at that time I had nine hours of history.
And then that evolved into the PhD program.
Then in 1955, we went to Charleston, South Carolina to talk one year at the Citadel.
And after that academic year, I came to Texas A&M in the fall of 1956 and have been here since my first retirement in 86 from full-time and part-time.
Went back in the department part-time until 91 and retired.
That's been a long time ago.
All right, the connection with A&M.
How did you and A&M have this connection?
How did you know there was a vacancy?
What contact was made by whom?
My last year of graduate studies at the University of Texas, Professor Ralph Steen, who was the head of the department at A&M, was a visiting prof at UT when I got to know him.
I did not have a class with him, but we talked then some about maybe at A&M in the future.
I went out to the Citadel.
He called me and said, Garland, if you're coming, this is the time because the legislature just passed a law requiring six hours of American history.
And that year, Ralph hired five people.
And he was the department head by then.
And so he hired me from the Citadel.
So I was Citadel only one academic year, and I was reluctant to leave after one year.
I also felt if I wanted to get back to Texas and the Texas A&M, I better come then, because that wasn't an opportunity.
The year at Charleston was very fine, a lovely city and a fine school.
As far as you recall, did Dr. Steen interview you in any manner?
No.
in austin at ut but did i come down for an interview he just offered me the job on the phone well by letter and uh what was the this is the only dollars and cents question what was the beginning salary i think it was 3 200. i might go back for nine months when i was trying to get a job and leave ut and wanted midwestern
in Wichita Falls, went in at Arlington State in Arlington, and you had a very good friend there who called Walter.
Walter said, Mr. Bagus, would you like to be considered for that job?
I really don't remember how I learned about the Citadel.
And ended up with an offer from Arthur.
But one thing that made it attractive to Charleston was a different part of the country.
But as important to us, I think the offer was $2,700 there.
But they had faculty housing, and you paid $3 a room.
A seven-room apartment was $21 a month.
Does that come out right?
Three times seven is $21.
It was in downtown Charleston.
in the old Citadel.
That's what made it especially attractive.
But then, I guess it was mid-spring semester when Ralphstein called and asked if I would be interested in being in it.
Describe the physical move from Charleston to Brazos County.
What did you bring and how did you bring it?
What were your belongings at that time?
Well, I think I ought to go back to leaving Austin for a little while.
And also we were living in student housing.
And we had a chambers range, if you've ever seen a chambers range.
Paid $300 for it, now they're antiques worth 1800 or so I've seen.
And a bed and a couch and whatever.
If you've ever seen a wooden van, that little bitty part up over the wheels, that's where our...
From Austin to Charleston.
Mary was not with me because she was eight months plus pregnant with David, our oldest, and she flew up and never flown in an airplane.
David was delivered three weeks after she got to Charleston.
but it was really wonderful there because you immediately move into an environment with faculty housing and there was a built-in support group for a new faculty especially having a baby.
So with great reluctance we left.
When we came back,
We had much more room.
I think we'd added a breakfast table and four chairs, and that was about it.
And so when we came to Bryan, we rented a duplex on Bay Street, and we built a house on West Brookside.
Do you remember what that duplex cost?
I don't think it was more than $60 a month.
That first house we built was 13-5.
I still have the contract on there.
How long before you built that house?
It was built while we were here.
I mean right after we got here.
Right, okay.
And the Orr brothers, the Orr grocery stores with the builders, they also built houses on the side of their father who was a carpenter contractor.
And then we were in that house until Marilyn's mother and father retired
from Orange, Texas, where she had been a schoolteacher.
She was a barber.
And so they moved to Bryan.
We sold them that house and moved the next block up to another house, which we had built.
Describe the campus that you, to which you arrived, at which you arrived.
What was A&M then?
Well, there were about 7,000 students total.
And that number always sticks in my mind.
Because in either 82 or 83, when I was talking to freshmen, mothers and fathers, indicated that year we had as many freshmen as we had total students when we came in 1956.
Still a concern about the faculty housing surrounding the campus, all those homes that have been moved or destroyed or whatever they have been.
No air conditioning on campus.
My office was over in, what is that building they tore down to the left of the library, Burr-Hareton is now.
The one story red brick building.
I can't remember.
Started with a B.
It had been industrial arts at one time, but now it was offices.
History was located in the academic building where the department was.
And see that year they hired five new people.
I think there were probably six already here, maybe seven.
So the department almost doubled?
Almost doubled.
But I'd have to go back and vote.
There may have been ten faculty, but that year because of the law requiring that five people were hired.
And it was history and government?
History and government.
All these were hired to teach history, though some did sometimes teach government.
All of those other, except myself, are not dead.
Describe who were the senior faculty and what were they like?
Ralph Steen was the department head, probably one of the best classroom people I've ever known.
In his Texas history, students would almost fight to get in.
Fight may be a part where they would scheme, do whatever they could to get into this class.
a very kind gentleman, ran the department very well.
He put up with some of our prima donnas, such as Allen Elson.
To this day, I still meet people somewhat older.
Oh, did you know Screamin' Allen Elson?
And the answer's always yes.
I liked Al.
He sometimes got provoked when he thought a classroom was his classroom and someone came in and moved in extra chairs and I've seen him throw them down the hall.
But whatever people thought about, his students remembered him and those who had him remember him to this day as far as I know.
What did he most often scream about?
He wasn't always that sure.
It was my impression, note that word impression, that no matter what course he was teaching, whether it's 105, which is before the Civil War, or some other course, he always...
He really came unglued in any attempt.
discuss Franklin Roosevelt.
He was a man of strong opinions.
He was also, as far as I know, he was an ordained Church of Christ... Disciples.
Disciples, excuse me, of Christ.
Preacher.
I never did hear him preach.
As you walked down the hall, you could hear him lecturing.
But he was a harsh man.
David, our youngest, who was now a year or two old and talking, we took with him, with us.
We walked in.
He won't know where the horsey was.
Other colleagues?
Tom Miller.
Tom was a short, heavy-set guy, very thick.
I think Tom always said he was not very true about the administration, not so much about his team as about Dr. Steen's successors.
His field was Texas history, I guess, principally, though we all covered it every day.
My gosh.
Was Claude Hall here?
Claude came in 54.
Year before, you came in 56.
So Claude Hall was okay.
Claude came in 54, I believe.
Of course, Claude was also a, in a sense, a junior member that certainly became one of the more outstanding senior members in the department.
So you forgot the next department head after the man who followed us.
Milton Nance.
Rapstein had become president of Stephen F. University in Nacogdoches, and J. Milton Nance became the department head.
Milton also was a very interesting man.
There's Rapstein's style of management, I think, even more.
I hesitate.
I like the word consensus building.
He was certainly a man who
who both tended to be more hard-nosed, tended to be, I am the department head.
No such thing as department committees in the sense of tenure, promotion, things like that.
And I'm not always sure that's the best way to do it.
Sometimes, at least from my viewpoint,
The department head making the decisions, at least in my observation, has not always been that much worse than committees making decisions.
Milton and I socialized some, our families did.
We had children about the same age, exchanging birthday parties and so on.
He was, though under...
Ralph Steen, we were expected to be here virtually from 8 to 5.
The military team were to demand that we be here from 8 to 5.
Sometimes we were and sometimes we were not.
Were there any unspoken guidelines that you quickly understood about dress, appearance, conduct, social life?
Well, you were expected, but it didn't bother me because I expected myself to wear a shirt, tie, and coat to class.
Frankly, it bothers me now when I see former colleagues not doing that, but I thought that was part of the demeanor of being a professional in the classroom.
You were expected to be available to your students.
which, honestly, now rarely happens.
That part I would not quarrel with Ned Charleston about, because it also fit into my own style, and I expected the professor to be available.
Did faculty members smoke in their offices then?
That I don't remember right now.
I thought when I got here, I thought some of them did.
Pipes and so forth.
Of course, Charles Wines, he spoke to Pipe.
Did Al smoke cigarettes?
I think so, but I don't know.
No, I'm thinking about Alan Yost.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I think so.
Who were, who, when you arrived, who taught European, everybody you thought of so far
When John Hill was here, he taught, remember we didn't offer that much non-American history.
I think technically Allen Nelson was a Latin American.
John Hill was a medievalist.
And I gather he taught whatever European that we had.
And then coming with?
At one time, I taught a European course, too, the survey courses.
I had also taught in the Citadel.
Who came with you the same year?
Garland Bayless, Lloyd Taylor, Alan Ashcraft, Wesley Chumley,
I said, not Wines.
He stayed two or three years, and then he went to Southwest, San Marcos, Southwestern.
He didn't die, not Wines.
Charles Wines came the next year, two or three years later.
Let's see, John, what about John Hill?
John Hill was here when I got here, but he left Charlotte to go to Houston.
I see.
I'm numerically his replacement.
And he taught medieval, didn't he?
Medieval.
Yeah, yeah.
But he went temporarily.
To the U of H for a year and then stayed, yeah.
But he stayed.
What were your assigned duties the first few years?
Each survey.
How many sections and how many students were normally in those sections?
Anywhere from four to five sections.
And the classes were Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday mornings and Monday, Wednesday, Friday.
Describe your style of teaching.
The way you did the classes.
What did you expect of the students?
What kinds of tasks and grading system?
I expected attendance.
I think sometimes I was teased off and told them, one, I expect you to be here on time.
I encouraged them to be prepared.
That wasn't always possible.
I'd often tell them that three Fs, three Fs made an F and three tardies made an F.
in answers.
I don't know that I ever carried it out, but I told them that I did not believe in using the curve.
I did not grade on the curve.
And whatever the standard was, whether it was 90 up to an A or 94 or whatever, I thought it wouldn't care for me.
Quiz time, I generally tend toward essays.
After that, I have the larger classes, a combination of multiple choice and essays.
In all senior courses, I retire.
They were all essays.
I know you'd use them for, let's say, exams, internal papers, knowledge and graduate courses.
Describe the, in the first years, in the survey classes, describe the students.
All core.
Journey receptive.
Respectful servant.
Almost all freshmen.
You'd have an occasional, someone who'd put it off, but you were always, you were always freshmen.
Obviously during bonfire time, they were tired than usual.
I sometimes wasn't too sympathetic.
I know people don't like to hear war stories, but I reminded them that while at sea, if you had the watch from 8 to 12,
and you went to bed at 12.30, you roughed your journal quarters at 5 to 5.30.
And I would sometimes suggest that at your age, all you need is four hours sleep a night anyway.
So I'm not really interested in...